\section{Introduction}
Industrialised societies have become increasingly reliant on the supply of
electric energy since the connection of large power stations began in 1938.
The extent to which this is true can be seen in the financial impact that loss
of supply has on society.


In June 2004 the United Kingdom (UK) became a net importer of natural gas for
the first time in 8 years[EIA DOE].  Since energy industry privatisation by
the Conservatives in the 1980s, use of domestic gas reserves for electricity
generation has been encouraged and exploited.

% Insert dash for gas pie-chart here.

As UK natural gas production has now peaked and consumption continues to grow,
concern over reliance on imports from less stable regions has increased.

The UK is hugely reliant on fossil fuels.  More than three quarters of UK
electricity is generated from a relatively small number of large coal and gas
fired power stations[Energy Digest].  Of the 298 stations with capacity over
1MW in the UK, 63 gas fuelled (including CCGT) and 13 coal fired stations
supply over 290 TWh of the UK's 393TWh annual electric energy
production[DUKES].  Much of the remainder is generated through nuclear
fission.


Concerns over climate change and security of supply have caused the UK
government to pursue self-sustainable sources of electric energy.  This is
illustrated by the government?s recent decision to make a legally binding
commitment to an 80% reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2050, relative to
1990 levels[].


Relative to most other commodities, trade of electric energy is still in its
infancy.  Liberalisation and unbundling of electricity supply industries costs
many millions of pounds to implement[].  Countries, having made this
investment, continue to restructure and adjust their energy markets in the
hope of further reducing costs to the consumer and promoting innovation and
efficiency through competition.


\subsection{Conventional national power systems}
Economies of scale prompted construction of the first large-scale power
stations in the UK at the beginning of the twentieth century.  Following the
introduction of the Electricity (Supply) Act 1926 the largest and most
efficient of these were connected by a series of regional high-voltage
three-phase AC grids synchronised at 50 Hertz.  Integration was completed and
a national transmission system made operational in the UK for the first time
in 1938.  This approach to electricity supply is largely the same as that
still employed throughout the UK to the present day.  Alternating current,
mainly from rotating synchronous machines, is transformed to high voltages for
bulk transmission over long distances with high efficiency.  Power from the
transmission system is fed through distribution networks in a uni-directional
fashion at lower voltages before final usage.

While maintenance and extension of the transmission system and of distribution
networks is an everyday activity for energy utilities, many power system
components have extremely long operational lifetimes[].  This and the
magnitude of the capital investment made post-war in construction of the
electricity networks suggests that there is likely to be little change in the
topology of the system of wires in the foreseeable future.  This is further
compounded by the fact that distribution networks are often radial in their
structure.  Reliability and protection are major issues in the operation of
power systems and the task of detecting and isolating a fault is often more
difficult in systems that are meshed.

Large-scale thermal power stations operate steam and gas turbines around 13
metres in length, approximately 400 tons in weight and rotate at up to 3600
revolutions per minute[SIEMENS].  The kinetic energy stored in these turbines
and the connected synchronous machines is vast and the associated flywheel
effect plays an important role in smoothing short-term imbalances in supply
and demand[].

Synchronous machines used in large thermal power stations invariably use a
rotor winding that is excited and a magnetic flux created by a DC current.
Controlling the magnitude of the rotor field current allows the reactive power
provided or absorbed by the machine to be adjusted.  Reactive power is
essential in maintaining system voltage within permissable limits[].

\subsection{Highly distributed national power systems}
The highly distributed power system is a conceptual future for the UK's
national energy network.  It is capable of meeting current targets for reduced
greenhouse gas emissions[] and reduces reliance on foreign fuel imports.  It
is a system in which all but the least polluting fossil fuelled power stations
have been decommissioned.  Their output supplanted by distributed generation,
supported with demand-side management measures and advances in energy storage
technology.

Distributed (or embedded) generation is most easily defined as electricity
production plant connected to the national electricity network at the
distribution level[DG Book].  The transmission system being defined as that
which operates at of above 275kV in England and Wales or at or above 132kV in
Scotland.  This encompasses most small-scale plant, but there exist exceptions
such as large-scale wind farms.

Hydro-electric dams, biomass fuelled power stations and wind farms are the
three sources of renewable energy currently available in the UK with
capacities equivalent to that of fossil fuelled plant.  Hydro-electric power
stations are often large-scale and transmission connected for bulk transport
of power to load centres.  The low energy density of biomass fuels, relative
to that of fossil fuels, often dictates that related generating plant is
located close the fuel source origin and connected to a distribution network.
The time varying nature of wind energy necessitates the use of induction
machines for generation.  These are typically sinks of reactive power and
require support for operation and maintenance of voltage.

\subsubsection{Increased source granularity}
In terms of demand the UK power system is already highly distributed.  The
number of generators, controllable loads and storage systems is expected to be
much greater in a HDPS.  However, there are at present already around 260
generators supplying energy to consumers and the mechanisms currently in place
to facilitate the trade of their power may be adaptable.

Consumers and owners of small-scale generation will continue to desire
protection from the risks associated with the wholesale marketplace.  Today?s
typical domestic and commercial supply contracts between consumers and energy
retailers offer such protection.  As the penetration of DER grows the role of
energy retailers offering aggregation services will likely grow as more plant
owners come to desire representation in the marketplace.  While there are a
great many ways in which this aggregation may be arranged it remains
essentially a contractual arrangement. A much larger challenge lies in the
operation and control of a system in which the state of plant is principally
determined by a decentralised free market.  The network may be divided
into ?cells? for the provision of a single point of control, but each cell may
contain individual items of plant being aggregated by different companies.
Controlling the DER, so as to adhere to system constraints, must be done in
the most economically efficient, in the least environmentally damaging manner
and according to contracted access arrangements.  Also, the details of any
control measures undertaken must be fed back to the marketplace such that they
may be taken into consideration during the settlement process.  This interface
between the technical domain and the commercial mechanisms remains an open
research topic.

\subsubsection{Inversion of control}
Consumers have grown accustomed to using power from the grid at will.  System
loads are by and large passive and, with the exception of dual rate white
metered loads, only the largest make adjustments to their consumption
according to price signals or system conditions.  It is likely that the
fluctuating nature of the power output from generators exploiting renewable
energy sources will necessitate an increase in the adoption of active loads.
As control shifts from being almost purely supply-side, an opportunity opens
for the energy marketplace to offer appropriate consumer choice, not only in
terms of cost, but Quality of Service (QoS) also. Advances in smart metering
promise to support such a migration.

\subsubsection{Reduced network reticulation}
The connection of controllable energy resources to lower voltage and less
reticulated areas of the network may also offer new possibilities for
structuring the relationship between the market and the system for management
of network constraints.  There are generally three options for power system
constraint management.

\begin{itemize}
  \item Only permit the formation of energy trades if delivery is physically
  feasible.
  \item Impose delivery charges which increase as network constraints are
   approached.
  \item Request extended bids and offers which include costs associated with
  the adjustment of participant?s desired position.
\end{itemize}

The third option most closely describes the method currently used in the United
Kingdom.  In a highly reticulated network it is difficult to determine the
direction of each participant?s energy flows.  In turn, this poses
difficulties in determining if a particular delivery is feasible and which
participants are responsible for congesting the network.  Distribution
networks are typically less reticulated than the transmission network to which
the majority of generation is connected at present.  Therefore, there may be
opportunities to utilise options one or two in an energy marketplace for an
HDPS.

Furthermore, the lower voltage of distribution networks may open up
opportunities for more widespread use of power electronics technologies such
as FACTS and phase shifting devices.  These would provide a limited ability to
direct the flow of electrical energy.  How this might be managed on a wide
scale and how efficient interaction with the marketplace might be achieved is
open to investigation

\subsubsection{Dual objective optimisation}
Along with concern over the UK?s dependence on natural gas imports, concern
over the environmental impact of electricity generation is a primary motivator
for a move to HDPS.  The energy market is expected to simultaneously minimise
costs to the consumer and encourage reduced emission of greenhouse gasses.

The European Union Greenhouse Gas Emission Trading Scheme (EU ETS) is an
example of how a second marketplace running parallel to electricity trade, in
this case trading allowances, may give weight to this new objective.  There
are other ways in which the greenhouse gas output of certain technologies may
be taken into consideration and this remains an open and important research
topic.
